doc: update migrating from slurm section of admin guide (#7253)
flux-framework/flux-core: doc/guide/admin_slurm.rst

Flux Maturity
=============

The Flux project began around 2012.  Flux has been used for a decade or more
for managing complex ensembles and workflows at LLNL under Slurm and LSF
in situations where the traditional workload managers were not up to the task.
Although Flux was designed from the beginning to replace Slurm and was

> deployed as such on several small systems at LLNL, it did not gain momentum

Reviewer: Here "momentum" means user-ship at the lab, or wider knowledge about it, fixing all the bugs, or some combination of the above? I think momentum is probably a good word choice, and I primarily want to understand it.

Author: Not sure if it's the right word, but I meant to refer to the high quality feedback we started getting from sys admins and users once they were forced to engage because their ability to use/maintain this system depended on being able to use flux effectively.  That started a really strong feedback loop.

Before El Cap I think interest was more casual and despite many attemts to engage sys admins in LC (for example) we didn't get very far with that because they were busy with other things and just not that interested.

Reviewer: I think momentum is a good word for that.

as a system workload manager until 2024 with the early deliveries of
`El Capitan <https://hpc.llnl.gov/hardware/compute-platforms/el-capitan>`_.

Flux is now in daily production use as the sole system workload manager on
El Capitan (currently in slot 1 of the `TOP500 <https://www.top500.org/>`_)
and its unclassified sister systems at LLNL.  These machines are capability
workhorses, continuously in demand for LLNL's most cutting edge,
mission-critical activities.  The process of standing them up brought the
Flux team together to address problems of scale and stability with
unprecedented urgency.  As a result, system deployments of Flux on
virtually any size system are viable at this point.

> This experience did bring missing features in to focus that have now been

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This experience brought missing features in to focus that have now been
```

prioritized for near term development.  We expect substantial progress to
be made on all of these items in 2026:

Rolling software upgrade
  Flux nodes won't interact with other Flux nodes unless they are running
  *exactly* the same flux-core version.  When flux-core 1.0.0 is released,
  relaxed rules will be enacted to support rolling upgrades.

Flux restart with running jobs
  Restarting Flux kills running jobs.  The design to allow running
  jobs to continue is not yet fully implemented.

Reservations
  Flux does not yet have a way to request allocations that begin at a fixed
  time in the future.  Arrangements for dedicated application time currently
  require manual/scripted actions by system administrators.

Flux graph-based scheduling scalability
  Efforts to optimize the Fluxion scheduler graph-based resource
  representation for storage space efficiency are ongoing.  Meanwhile a
  flat resource model similar to Slurm's that scales well but is limited
  in capability is typically used on large systems.

Preservation of job step information

>   In Flux, there are no job steps.  Instead, a sub-instance of Flux is started

Author: I saw your comment later on - I'll tack that on here, even though people migrating from slurm will definitely know that one.

  on a resource allocation, and user applications are run as jobs within the
  sub-instance.  There is little coupling between the system instance and its
  sub-instances which improves scalability.  Unfortunately, sub-instance job

>   data is not preserved unless the user explicitly arranges for it, which some

Author: In the Flux sub-instance, like you get when you run `flux alloc` or `flux batch`, all the jobs that run are recorded in the KVS like usual, but once the sub-instance exits, the KVS data is gone unless you use the `--dump` option to preserve a tarball dump on completion.

What is preserved by default is the stdio of the sub-instance.  If your batch script or whatever uses something like `flux watch`, the sub-instance job output goes there and is preserved.  But if you're looking for things like the eventlogs for jobs that ran, it's gone unless you save it.  We need to change the default so that at least some of that is preserved, without increasing the coupling too much so that it affects scalability.

Side note: you can `flux --parent kvs put ...` from the sub instance (for example).

  find surprising.

Multi-system fair share accounting

>   Flux has an optional fair-share accounting system for gathering usage data

Reviewer: Can (should) we link flux-accounting here?

Author: I'm not sure this doc needs a bunch of links but I would not fight too hard against that if you feel strongly.

Reviewer: I don't feel immensely strongly. Reader dudes can use Google-dude.

  and setting job priorities.  Unlike Slurm, there is not yet a capability to
  deploy one accounting system for multiple Flux systems.

Package availability
  Flux system administrators are encouraged to install Flux as system packages,
  but pre-built packages are not widely available.  Source RPM packages for
  RHEL 8 and 9 are manually attached to GitHub releases, and test debs can be
  built from the source trees of several Flux Framework projects.  Automated

>   package production and Linux distribution relationships are under discussion.

Reviewer: Under discussion makes it sound like it may _not_ happen. I think it's more something we aspire/want to do, we just need to figure out the right way to do it. Can we say something like planned? On the roadmap for the coming year? Two years? Underway? Likely in the future?

  :ref:`background_security`.

Flux doesn't need a step manager
  In Slurm, a *job* is a resource allocation scheduled by the Slurm scheduler.
  Within the allocation, a *job step* is a unit of work scheduled by the the
  Slurm step manager. Since a new Flux instance can be launched as a
  :term:`job` in another Flux instance (subdividing its resources), there is
  no need have a step abstraction or a step manager.  All units of work are
  jobs scheduled and launched by the same robust system.  Limitations of

>   Slurm's step manager have been a source of long standing problems.

Author: In Slurm, the job has a prolog and epilog.  Steps do not have one.
In Flux, steps are jobs, but only the top level Flux can be configured to have a prolog and epilog.

So it's pretty much the same and probably doesn't need to be mentioned.

>   Slurm's step manager have been a source of long standing problems.

Reviewer 2: Is it true that only the top-level flux _can_ have prologs and epologs, or that only the system instance is usually configured to have them?  It seems like a bit of an odd limitation for them to be forbidden in user instances (they would be user-mode prolog/epilog steps, no admin, but still).

Flux APIs are not an afterthought

>   Well thought out Python and C APIs make it easy to integrate Flux with

Author: I can mention Go but since I'm not finding docs and don't think it's being developed and tested as actively as the C and python bindings, I would probably want to just add something like "Experimental bindings for Go and Julia are in development".

Oh that reminds me that the fact that Slurm's APIs are GPL is considered a problem by some collaborators.  We should mention that ours are the non-viral LGPL.

>   Well thought out Python and C APIs make it easy to integrate Flux with

Reviewer: It's mostly for sched, and because we integrate the scheduler into Kubernetes. It's packaged alongside flux-sched, [here](https://github.com/flux-framework/flux-sched/tree/master/resource/reapi/bindings/go)  but also has an automated release (and modular package that I use across projects) at https://github.com/flux-framework/fluxion-go. You can see an example in [fluence](https://github.com/flux-framework/flux-k8s/blob/c9541c15c75928fb033ecfbf160410024166c36e/src/fluence/go.mod#L6). 

Side note - I did make a skeleton for go bindings, [flux-go](https://github.com/flux-framework/flux-go) and it's primarily at a stage of "Will continue development when there is a use case." I'm anticipating that might be next year if we are going to look at center-level stuff that uses Flux. Go is the language of cloud stuff. Python is good if it needs to be touched/understood by a scientist (or is a prototype) but doing some final, production service thing in Python or C won't really be the best choice, imho.

  workflow systems and new environments.

Flux has a rich resource representation
  Flux's design incorporates a graph-based resource model that is

>   extensible to arbitrary resource types.

Reviewer: This is much better I think.

Flux is dynamic
  The Flux design supports growing and shrinking allocations.

Flux is scalable
  Flux's recursive launch design enables each allocation to scale
  independently.  Each instance of Flux has job throughput and node count
  scalability comparable to Slurm.  But a cluster will typically be running

>   many instances of Flux compared to one instance of Slurm.

Reviewer: If I can get flux-hierarchy optimized, we can at least report a throughput in the thousands. Math says we should get much higher than that, but math is limited by me. :)

Reviewer 2: We have the classic flux-tree, which did the same thing, but this already mentions the recursive parallelism so I would call it covered personally.

Reviewer: flux-tree was removed (we have it still in tutorial content if you need me to dig it up), and (if you haven't looked at the code recently) it's a hugely complex spaghetti bash script with a Python wrapper to plug into the flux cli that (imho) would be unmaintainable. I have a nice library that is going to make this a more production setup, also affording more advanced use cases like creating the hierarchy of brokers to later submit to with different communication strategies. For example, `flux-tree` won't work to provide a service of flux hierarchies that exist across centers.

Reviewer: Here is flux-tree:

- https://github.com/flux-framework/Tutorials/blob/ef36e935ba8665d1b3ea61d567918d779953bfe2/2025/ISC-AWS/JupyterNotebook/flux-tree/flux-tree#L123. it's great for a demo, but doesn't fit the bill for the kind of interactions I want, and that will be reflected in future cases for multi-cluster scheduling.
- I am working on https://github.com/converged-computing/flux-hierarchy/ as a more production tool. We already have a setup that can handle a URI interface, interfaces to start / stop / submit / measure throughput, and node executors for different node or cluster types.

Flux uses event-driven messaging
  In contrast to Slurm's multi-threaded, monolithic server design, Flux
  is built upon distributed message brokers and event-driven (asynchronous,
  reactive) agents that communicate only with messages.  Building distributed
  services on this substrate is interesting, fun, and scales well.

Flux encourages experimentation
  A single-user Flux instance can be started standalone or within a resource
  allocation on any system without administrator privileges.  Furthermore,
  your Flux instance can be reconfigured, extended with plugins, or modified.
  If you want to add a new Flux service, implement a new scheduler plugin,
  wire your workflow system directly into Flux's cerebral cortex, or just
  litter the code with print statements to understand it better, you are
  encouraged to do so!  This freedom cannot be offered by monolithic systems
  that run mostly as root.

> 

Reviewer: What about something about converged environments, or cloud? What I say in talks is something along the lines of how the dynamism / elasticity, event-driven architecture and scalability of Flux make it amenable to cloud setups, and we can (and have) deployed across clouds for Kubernetes, VMs, and as components in cloud services. "Flux doesn't care where you run it" essentially.

Reviewer: Here is are two suggestions:

```console
Flux is agnostic to where you deploy it.

    Flux is modular and composable, making it easy to integrate into converged and cloud environments.  
    Flux runs in a single container, via docker-compose, virtual machines in the cloud, or easily in Kubernetes.    
    Elasticity and dynamism map well to auto-scaling and ephemeral resources. Programming a workload to use
    Flux thus makes it portable across environments.
```

Or different title:

```console
Flux is a portability layer
```
